# Multicolor cellID for Calcium Recording
NeuroPAL worms use 3 fluorophores and a panneuronal marker to enable cell segmentation and identification. They also allow for a calcium indicator for recording cell activity. This repo combines the information from the multicolor recording to assign cell identities to the neurons in the calcium recording.

## Setup
All code is in MATLAB, and has been tested in 2019b and 2020a

Download this repo and add it to your MATLAB path

Download the Paninski Lab NeuroPAL software. I suggest putting the code and its dependencies into one folder and adding that entire folder to your MATLAB path.
https://github.com/amin-nejat/CELL_ID

## Usage
NOTE: Steps 1 and 2 can be performed in parallel

### Step 0
Record multicolor and calcium data
Move the multicolor imaging folder in the calcium imaging "brainscanner" folder

### Step 1
#### S1a
Extract calcium traces in individual neurons
using the 3dbrain pipeline
https://github.com/leiferlab/3dbrain

#### S1b
Run `create_calcium_reference`
* select the brainscanner folder
* generates **calcium_data_average_stack.mat**

Run `visualize_light`
In the GUI take the following actions
* Load the **calcium_data_average_stack.mat** into the NeuroPAL software
* Preprocessing > Artifact Removal > Manual
* Draw a region around any autofluorescence in the gut and any other oddities
* Auto-Detect
* Auto-ID All. The IDs are random, but the software won't save cell locations without IDs
* Analysis > Save ID Info (click no on pop up)

### Step 2
#### S2a
Run `create_multicolor_adjustment_file`
* select the multicolor folder
* generates **multicolor_adjustment.mat**

Run `adjust_multicolor_image`
* select the **multicolor_adjustment.mat** file in the multicolor folder
* generates **neuropal_input.mat**

In the GUI take the following actions:
* Crop the image before any other manipulations to increase speed.
* Avoid using the roll worm dial unless necessary as it requires interpolation and slows the program
* Standard orientation is to have the worm lying on its right side facing the left
* Adjust the gamma of the green channel if necessary
* Remove outliers tool will set everything inside the region to 0
* see **README_adjust_multicolor_image.md** for more info

#### S2b
Run `visualize_light`
In the GUI take the following actions
* Load the **neuropal_input.mat** from the multicolor folder into the NeuroPAL software
* Remove any artifacts not removed in Step 2a
* Auto-Detect
* Auto-ID All

Select each neuron and try to identify it using the manuals here: https://www.hobertlab.org/neuropal/
* Note that there are separate manuals for NeuroPAL w and w/o GCaMP (OH15500 and OH15262)

Once you are finished IDing:
* Analysis > Save ID Info > Click yes on re-ID pop-up if you haven't recently

### Step 3
Run `align_multicolor_to_calcium_imaging`
* NOTE: You can continue to perform **Step 2b** and **Step 3** as you identify more neurons

Optional: run `check_cell_assignment` to check the assignments between multicolor and calcium imaging.
* Displays neurons that were tracked by the calcium recording segmentation software on the left
* Displays neurons segmented in the multicolor worm on the right
* Clicking on a neuron in the calcium image will highlight the neuron it is assigned to in the multicolor Recording
* Clicking on the neuron in the multicolor recording will assign it to the currently highlighted neuron in the calcium recording

## Documents Glossary
#### calcium_data_average_stack.mat
Generated by `create_calcium_reference`. An average of the first n frames of the calcium recording. This is used to get the cell body locations of the calcium recording to align to the multicolor recording. File is in a format that the NeuroPAL software `visualize_light` can read. **.csv** has the cell body locations found by the NeuroPAL software and **\_ID.mat** has the cell body locations that NeuroPAL reads in.

#### calcium_to_multicolor_alignment.mat
Generated by `align_multicolor_to_calcium_imaging` and edited by `check_cell_assignment`. This is the final output of this pipeline. Contains:
* assignments: The link between the cell body locations in the multicolor image and the neurons trackd by the calcium extraction software
* calcium_recording: The neurons x time calcium recording that was aligned to the multicolor image
* labels: The cell ID labels (AVA, RIM, etc) for the neurons in the calcium recording
* locations: The cell body locations for both the multicolor image and the calcium recording.

#### multicolor_adjustment.mat
Generated by `create_multicolor_adjustment_file` and edited by `adjust_multicolor_image`. Contains the multicolor data as well as the channel intensity and gamma scaling, rotation of the image, artifact removal mask, and xyz flips.

#### neuropal_data.mat
Generated by `adjust_multicolor_image` and edited by `visualize_light` (from the NeuroPAL code). Converts **multicolor_adjustment.mat** into a form that NeuroPAL software `visualize_light` can read and edit.

## Contact
Created by [Matt Creamer](https://www.matthewcreamer.com/) - feel free to contact me!
